"No. 99-048
Supreme Court of Montana

In re Marriage of Holloway
299 Mont. 291 (Mont. 2000) • 2000 MT 104
Decided Apr 27, 2000

No. 99-048.
Submitted on Briefs: September 23, 1999.
Decided: April 27, 2000.
Appeal From District Court of the Ninth Judicial
District, In and for the County of Glacier, The
292 Honorable Marc G. Buyske, Judge presiding. *292
For Appellant: John K. Kurtz, Jr.; Werner, Epstein
Johnson, Cut Bank, Montana.
For Respondent: Chris P. Christensen; Keil
Christensen, Conrad, Montana.
Justice W. WILLIAM LEAPHART delivered the
Opinion of the Court.
¶ 1 David W. Holloway (David) appeals from the
judgment and order of the Ninth Judicial District
Court, Glacier County, ordering that Cheryl
Holloway (Cheryl), a/k/a Cheryl Woolsey, pay
David one-half of the date-of-dissolution value of
the family home and property (the house) upon its
sale. We affirm in part and reverse and remand in
part.
Issues
We restate the issues on appeal as follows:
¶ 2 1. Did the District Court properly
construe Cheryl's petition as a request to
interpret the Agreement?
¶ 3 2. Did the District Court correctly interpret the
Agreement?

•

999 P.2d 980

¶ 4 3. Did the District Court err in entering
judgment because Cheryl's petition was
procedurally barred?
Standard of Review
¶ 5 The construction and interpretation of written
agreements is a question of law. See, e.g., In re
Estate of Hill (1997), 281 Mont. 142, 145, 931
P.2d 1320, 1323 (citations omitted). Whether a
portion of a written agreement is ambiguous is
also a question of law. See Estate of Hill, 281
Mont. at 146, 931 P.2d at 1323. We review
questions of law de novo to determine whether
they are correct. See Bruner v. Yellowstone
County (1995), 272 Mont. 261, 265, 900 P.2d 901,
903.
Factual and Procedural Background
¶ 6 We note at the outset that the District Court
judgment contains a number of inaccuracies: The
judgment assumes that the house was burdened
with debt at the date of dissolution, but David and
Cheryl owned it free of debt. The court listed the
sales price for the house as $74,500, but the buysell agreement lists the price as $75,000. Finally,
the court ordered that David ""shall be paid onehalf of the value of the real property as of January
8, 1994 . . .,"" but the decree of dissolution is
293 actually dated on January 5, 1994. *293
¶ 7 Cheryl filed a petition for dissolution and the
parties' marriage was dissolved by court order on
January 5, 1994. A property settlement agreement
(the Agreement), executed by Cheryl and David,
was incorporated into the decree of dissolution.
The Agreement provided in relevant part:
1

In re Marriage of Holloway

The parties own a house located at 945
U.S. 89 North in Glacier County, State of
Montana. Wife shall receive the family
home subject to the debt owed thereon.
Wife agrees to maintain the house and
property in at least the condition it is now,
and when sold, she will return to Husband
one-half the proceeds of the sale of the
house.
¶ 8 In November 1997, Cheryl entered into a buysell agreement with respect to the house and
subsequently filed a ""Petition to Modify Property
Settlement Agreement and Child Support
Agreement1"" in District Court. With regard to the
property settlement, Cheryl's petition asserted that
the Agreement failed to anticipate or address the
division of proceeds from the sale of the house in
light of Cheryl's substantial improvements to the
house, which increased its value, as well as
Cheryl's payment of all property taxes since the
date of dissolution. Cheryl asked the court to
allow her to retain, in addition to an amount
equaling one-half (1/2) of the proceeds realized
from the sale of the family real property in Glacier
County, Montana, an amount equaling the total of
the amount expended by Petitioner for
improvements to, and taxes upon, said real
property since January 5, 1994.
1 The child support agreement is not at issue

in this appeal.

¶ 9 Following a hearing, the District Court
concluded that the Agreement's failure to address
what would happen to the expenditures of one
party which were neither for maintenance nor
repairs created a latent ambiguity and construed
Cheryl's petition as a request to interpret the
Agreement in light of that ambiguity. The court
concluded that the Agreement contemplated that
Cheryl would maintain the value of the house at
the time of dissolution and divide that value when
the house was sold. The court found that both
parties benefitted from this arrangement: Cheryl
294 would not be obligated to immediately *294 pay

299 Mont. 291 (Mont. 2000)

David his share of the equity and would not have
to pay rent or buy another home. David would
benefit from a reduction of debt on the house,
increasing the equity to be divided upon its sale.
The court held that the property taxes were an
item of maintenance of the house that Cheryl was
responsible for pursuant to the Agreement.
¶ 10 The court found that the value of the house
on January 5, 1994, the date of dissolution, was
$55,500. Cheryl had entered into a buy-sell
agreement for $75,000. Cheryl claimed
$21,029.35 in expenditures for items other than
maintenance and repair — $3,716.59 thereof
constituted payments for property taxes. The court
ordered that David be paid one-half of the value of
the house as of January 8, 1994 — $27,750, less
one-half of the closing costs, real estate agent's
commissions and expenses associated with the
sale of the house.
Discussion
¶ 11 1. Did the District Court properly construe
Cheryl's petition as a request to interpret the
Agreement?
¶ 12 Cheryl's petition stated that the Agreement
""does not anticipate or address the issue of
equitable division of the proceeds resulting from
the sale of the family property, in light of
Petitioner having provided, since January 5, 1994,
substantial improvements to the property which
materially increased the value of the real property.
. . ."" The District Court held that ""[a]lthough
Petitioner's request to the Court is styled as a
petition to modify, the request in substance asks
this Court to interpret the written contract between
the parties in the face of the ambiguity concerning
the division of the increase in value of the real
property due to non-maintenance, non-repair
expenditures.""
¶ 13 Rule 8(e)(1), M.R.Civ.P., states in relevant
part that ""[n]o technical form of pleading or
motion are required."" This Court has held that it
will ""look to the substance of a motion, not just its

2

In re Marriage of Holloway

title, to identify what motion has been presented.""
Miller v. Herbert (1995), 272 Mont. 132, 136, 900
P.2d 273, 275. Cheryl's petition gave sufficient
notice to the court and David that Cheryl wanted
the court to interpret the Agreement in light of the
improvements she had made to the house. David
was not prejudiced by Cheryl's failure to use the
term ""interpret"" with regard to the Agreement.
¶ 14 David's argument that Cheryl must have
asked the court to modify the Agreement because
she asked the court to modify the child support
obligation in the same petition is not persuasive.
Although Cheryl raised these issues in the same
295 petition, they are *295 separate matters. The
hearing and the judgment on which this appeal is
based only concern the Agreement. We do not
agree with David that logic dictates that Cheryl
must have wanted the Agreement modified if she
wanted the child support obligation modified.
¶ 15 David further argues that the court erred in
construing Cheryl's petition as a request to
interpret the Agreement because she asked the
court to compensate her for property taxes
although she knew such payments constituted
maintenance when she signed the Agreement.
Even if Cheryl asked the court to modify the
Agreement with respect to the property taxes, the
issue is moot because the court did not modify the
Agreement with respect to the property taxes, but
found that ""[r]eal property taxes are an item of
expense necessary to maintain ownership of
property.""
¶ 16 The District Court correctly determined that ""
[t]he failure of the Settlement Agreement to
address the division of value caused by
expenditures of one party which are not for
maintenance or repairs is a latent ambiguity in the
agreement."" Black's Law Dictionary defines
""latent ambiguity"" as ""[a] defect which does not
appear on the face of language used or an
instrument being considered. It arises when
language is clear and intelligible and suggests but
a single meaning, but some extrinsic fact or some

299 Mont. 291 (Mont. 2000)

extraneous evidence creates a necessity for
interpretation or a choice between two or more
possible meanings."" Black's Law Dictionary 80
(7th ed. 1999). David's contention that the
Agreement's language is clear and unambiguous
may be correct insofar as the Agreement itself is
concerned, but fails to take into account the
ambiguity that arose once Cheryl began making
expenditures that were not for maintenance or
repairs.
Cheryl's
improvements
beyond
maintenance and repairs introduced the necessity
of interpreting the Agreement in light of them.
¶ 17 Finally, David argues that the District Court's
interpretation of the Agreement introduced an
additional provision to the Agreement that denied
him his full contractual rights. David contends that
he bargained for one-half of the proceeds and that
""[o]ne-half is one-half, nothing more and nothing
less."" Because we hold that the District Court
interpreted the Agreement in light of its latent
ambiguity, the District Court did not introduce an
additional provision to the Agreement, but merely
interpreted the Agreement to clarify what was
meant by ""one-half of the proceeds of the sale of
the house"" in the context of nonmaintenance
expenditures.
¶ 18 2. Did the District Court correctly interpret
296 the Agreement? *296

¶ 19 Upon finding that the Agreement contained a
latent ambiguity, the District Court properly
admitted parol evidence to interpret the
Agreement. See Ellingson Agency, Inc. v.
Baltrusch (1987), 228 Mont. 360, 366, 742 P.2d
1009, 1013 (citing § 28-3-301, MCA, which
states: ""A contract must be so interpreted as to
give effect to the mutual intention of the parties as
it existed at the time of contracting, so far as the
same is ascertainable and lawful.""). The court
found that a reasonable interpretation of the
Agreement was that Cheryl and David had
intended that Cheryl would maintain the date-ofdissolution value of the house and that they would
divide that value upon the future sale of the house.

3

In re Marriage of Holloway

299 Mont. 291 (Mont. 2000)

The court premised its conclusion on the mistaken
assumption that the house was burdened with debt
and that David benefitted from this arrangement
by the additional equity he would acquire upon
sale of the house from the reduction of debt.

repairs, totaling $17,312.76, from the sales price,
David should receive one-half of that amount,
minus one-half of the closing costs, real estate
agent's commissions and expenses associated with
the sale of the house.

¶ 20 We are not persuaded by David's argument
that he should receive one-half of the entire
proceeds of the sale of the house. He argues that
the Agreement's language that Cheryl would
maintain the house in ""at least the condition it is
now"" suggests that the parties contemplated that
Cheryl might improve the house. We agree with
Cheryl that this language served to protect David
from dissipation of the value of the property while
Cheryl was residing therein. The District Court's
finding that ""to permit [David] to share in the
increase in value attributable to such expenditures
[beyond maintenance and repairs] would permit
[David] to have more benefit from the Agreement
than the Agreement reasonably contemplates"" is
reasonable and supported by the record. We affirm
that portion of the judgment allowing Cheryl to
retain the proceeds from the sale of the house
attributable to her expenditures for improvements
beyond maintenance and repairs.

¶ 22 3. Did the District Court err in entering
judgment because Cheryl's petition was
procedurally barred?

¶ 21 It is undisputed that Cheryl and David owned
the house debt-free at the time of dissolution. In
light of the District Court's mistaken assumption
that the house was burdened with debt, the court's
interpretation of the Agreement as freezing values
as of the date of dissolution was not reasonable
because thereunder David did not benefit from the
Agreement at all. It is not reasonable to assume
that David would have preferred that Cheryl hold
half of the date-of-dissolution value of the
property for several years rather than receive the
same amount at the time of dissolution. A
reasonable interpretation of the Agreement would
297 reimburse Cheryl for the *297 improvements she
made beyond maintenance and repairs, but allow
David to receive one half of the additional
appreciation of the house since the date of
dissolution. In sum, after deducting Cheryl's
expenditures for items other than maintenance and

¶ 23 Our holding that the District Court properly
construed Cheryl's petition as a request to interpret
the Agreement is dispositive of this issue. The
procedural bars David raises pursuant to § 40-4208, MCA, and Rule 60(b), M.R.Civ.P., do not
apply, because the court did not modify or amend
the Agreement; it merely interpreted the latent
ambiguity in the Agreement. Cheryl's petition did
not seek relief from judgment, but asked the court
to interpret the Agreement in light of a latent
ambiguity. We have previously held that ""`[t]he
interpretation or clarification of an ambiguous
judgment does not involve amendment thereof, so
that even though power to modify is lacking, a
court may construe and clarify a decree disposing
of property, or enforce it.'"" Kottas v. Kottas
(1974), 164 Mont. 30, 33, 518 P.2d 1404, 1405
(citing 27B C.J.S. Divorce § 300(4)a). Based on
our holding that the District Court did not modify
the Agreement, we do not address David's
contention that the District Court did not allow
him to object to Cheryl's failure to follow
procedural requirements for modification. Cheryl's
request was not procedurally barred, and the
District Court properly assumed jurisdiction over
the matter.
¶ 24 Affirmed in part, reversed in part and
remanded to the District Court for further
proceedings consistent with this Opinion.
W. WILLIAM LEAPHART
We concur: J. A. TURNAGE, JIM REGNIER,
KARLA M. GRAY, TERRY N. TRIEWEILER,
JOHN W. LARSON.

4

In re Marriage of Holloway

299 Mont. 291 (Mont. 2000)

District Judge, sitting for Justice James C. Nelson,
JAMES E. PURCELL, District Judge, sitting for
Justice William E. Hunt, Sr.
The Honorable James E. Purcell, Judge of the
District Court, sitting for Justice William E. Hunt,
Sr.
298 *298